---
layout: post
title: Accessible Installer System Menus
author: Mike Ray
excerpt: Using Newt to create accessible menu system for the F123 desktop
tags: [Arch, Installer]
permalink: /blog/:title/
---

One of the keys to making F123 on the desktop successful, is the provision of properly accessible installation systems.

There is little point in providing an accessible Linux system for blind and visually impaired users if beginners, rather than seasoned Linux experts struggle to understand how to install it on their computers.

I have found a couple of different systems which are already out there on the internet and published under a license which would make it possible for us to use them:

* Arch Ultimate Installer (AUI)
* Arch Anywhere

The first of these, the AUI, consists solely of `bash` scripts. It makes copious use of the `select` command in `bash` which makes it possible to present the user with textual menus, consisting of lists from which to select a numbered option.

In my experience this is OK when the number of options is very small.

There is a fundamental problem with this when you cannot see.

Because `select` presents a long list in columns, and our screen-readers read across one line at a time, we will hear numbered options which are not sequential. This is because it will read option 1 for the first option on the first line, and then option number N, where N is a number corresponding to the height of the first column +1.

This is fine when only a few options to choose from are presented.

But take, for example, the choices of the keyboard configuration, which presents over 200 choices, the user would have to line down a large number of lines and try to hear and remember the number which corresponds to their choice.

Not easy, especially when your short-term memory starts to go in later life and remembering more than about seven things for short periods becomes more difficult.

The second system, `Arch Anywhere` uses a semi-graphical menu system to present `dialogs` to the user.

Now here I have to talk about a number of libraries which exist in the Linux software cannon which will do this, and talk about which is used by `Arch Anywhere` and why they are not ideal for our use.

## Dialog

The command used by `Arch Anywhere` is `dialog`. It is a command-line utility that can be called from a shell script and passed command-line options to build a variety of dialogs:

* Simple message boxes
* Yes/no choice boxes
* Check boxes and lists of check boxes
* List boxes

The `dialog` command uses an underlying library called `ncurses` and presents totally inaccessible dialogs.

## Whiptail

The `whiptail` command uses an underlying library called `slang` or s-lang`.

The `raspi-config` system familiar to users of the `Raspberry Pi` computer is written with `whiptail` dialogs.

It is accessible, but only up to a point. There are problems with it. It does support mouse input, which is useless to blind users.

## Newt

There is a `C` library called `newt`, which is an acronym for "Not Eric's Windowing Toolkit". Clearly the author has a sense of humour.

The `newt` system will generate all the dialogs which `whiptail` will do, but in my experience is far more accessible.

And `newt` does *not* support mouse input, making it's complexity a much reduced consideration.

Both `whiptail` and `newt` use the underlying `slang` library.

## Installation System using Newt

I have chosen to use `newt` to take the `Arch Anywhere` code, released under the GNU General Public License version 2, and rewrite it for our use.

The program I am writing, almost done actually, will be called `newtdialog` and will be replacing all the calls to `dialog` in the code.

It is written in C.

There are some Python programming options which call `newt` functions, but again, for some reason there are accessibility problems with these. I have tried both `snack` and `popcorn`, both of which are *almost*, but not quite, as accessible as using native `newt` functions from a C program.

Because it is possible with relative simplicity to process complex command-lines in C, `newtdialog` will be able to take options which will do everything `dialog` or `whiptail` do, but in a much more usable form.

The exception is `newt` does not support the mouse, so neither will `newtdialog. Again this is no problem for us, and is really an advantage.

## Short and Long Term Plans

In the short-term it is intended to release a sub-set of the `Arch Anywhere` functionality, which is very comprehensive, in early, perhaps alpha and beta releases of the Arch Linux F123 system.

In this solution, `newtdialog` will be a close match for the `dialog` command used by the current `Arch Anywhere` code-base. Some changes to the existing scripts will be needed. Leading to an incremental release strategy.

In the long-term, it might be better to make `newtdialog` or some similar program read it's options from configuration files, perhaps written in XML.


